# P86DRV (P86)

PMD's internal 86PCM driver replaces the ADPCM channel with a higher quality 8-bit sample playback. Its stereo capabilities also adds a new functionality to panning.

There's no size limit.

## Making a P86 File

### Preparing the Samples

First you need to get your samples ready. Open your samples in an audio editor, then:

- Resample them

    As PMD tries to make 86PCM compatible with ADPCM, it'll have many similarities with it, including its recommended sample rates and whatnot.

    The only documented sample rate is 16504Hz, which will play at `o5g`. But since some audio editors don't support it, I recommend exporting to the closest one upwards. I use 22050Hz.

    The highest supported sample rate is not documented, and it can go above the ADPCM's.

- If it's a stereo sample, convert it to mono

    The converter doesn't support stereo samples.

- Export them as 16-bit unsigned RAW.
    
    In Audacity, this is done by going to "Export Audio...", choosing "Other uncompressed files" at the time of export, and then choosing "16-bit unsigned" and RAW (headerless).

I also recommend putting a brief moment of silence after the sample finishes to avoid potential clicks in the converted audio.

Save the samples individually in the workspace folder.

### Sample Conversion

Now we'll use PCMCONV to get them to the 86PCM format.

In DOS, go to your workspace folder and use the following command:

```
pcmconv /w <input>.raw /b <output>.pc8
```

`/w` specifies the (input) file as a RAW 16-bit little-endian file, `/b` specifies the (output) file as 8-bit signed.

Since PMD uses a really specific frequency for o5g. If you're using a pitched sample and the input file is tuned, add the frequency to the conversion, as follows:

```
pcmconv /v <input>.raw 22050 /b <input>.pc8 16504
```

### Packing it up in a P86 Bank

Now to wrap up the package.

1. Run the following 2 DOS drivers to start PMD with 86PCM support and enable use of 86PCM:

    ```
    pmd86
    p86drv
    ```


2. Run the following command to clear the sample memory in RAM:
    ```
    pmdpcm86 /c
    ```

3. For every .pc8 sample you want to include in the file, run:
    ```
    pmdpcm <id> <filename>.pc8
    ```
    In which `<id>` corresponds to the instrument number to be called with the `@` command. Range is 0–255.

    This will load the sample into RAM and associate its addresses to its ID.

4. Once you're finished with all samples, wrap it up with:
    ```
    pmdpcm /s <filename>.p86
    ```

You can rebuild the file by running from step 2 onwards. If you want to add a new sample to the bank, simply load the P86 file:
```
pmdpcm /lr <filename>.p86
```
Then execute step 3 for every new sample in unclaimed slots, then step 4.

## Sequence and Commands

In the MML, to load a P86 file when playing the song, add the following header:

```
#PCMFile    <filename>.P86
```

The P86 file needs to always be in the same folder as the .MML or .M file for the song to be played properly. Some players won't play the song at all if the intended sample bank is not present or pre-loaded in memory.

To sequence the 86PCM, use the `J` channel.

> You can also set PPZ8's PZI files in `#PCMFile` for higher quality samples in the `J` channel, but for that, you'll need to load PMDPPZ instead of PMD86, and many Windows players don't support it.

### Set instrument (`@<value>`)

To choose the PCM isntrument, use `@`, in which the value corresponds to the sample ID in the P86. This is will make the sample play as-is once when a note is played.

### Set looped instrument (`@<value>,<start>,<end>,<release>`)

By adding values after setting the instrument, PMD can loop the samples from specific loop points.

To get the correct points, I search for them in sample units in audacity, and then divide the value by 32.

You can change the value behavior to be similar to ADPCM's by adding `/s` to the `#Option` header.

### Set volume envelope

You can set a volume envelope with the `E` command and it works as [specified before in the guide](4Chipcom.md\#volume-envelopes).

### Notes

As mentioned before, if the sample is encoded as 16504Hz, `o5g` will play the same as the source file.

If you're using a pitched sample and its pitch is any note other than a G, it's recommended to use a global transposition `_M<value>` and/or global detune command `DD<value>` to pitch it accordingly.

Making a macro is advised if using multiple samples with different base pitches and volumes.

### Portamento and Pitch LFO

The portamento notation (`{}`) is not supported in the 86PCM. Using it will result in only the last note being played.
```
J   @1 {cg}4        ;Only g is played
```

Additionally, any pitch LFO command will be ignored.

### Panning

While the ADPCM on the OPNA has hardpanning, the 86PCM has full stereo control so PMD has an additional panning command allowing for the extended range, with `px<value>`

The value range is -127 to 127, in which the negative values pan torwards the right and the positive values pan to the left.

PMD can also do a reverse phase effect, which results in a "surround" sound compared to the mono original sound. To use it you just add a 1 after the panning value:

```
J   @1 c2 px0,1 c2
```

This is a good effect if you want to the samples to sound fuller, however it might render the PCM channel silent if listening to the song in a mono speaker or environment, so keep that in mind.

The normal `p<value>` pan command also works in PMD86, and it's also hardpanned. However it gains an additional value in `p4` which allows for phase reversing.

